I live in an era of history when were
burdened with the common misconception
that civil disobedience is the emblem of
democracy people commonly say civil
disobedience is the essence of democracy
and this is an error the thesis of this
video to watching right now is that
instead civil disobedience is the
opposite of democracy don't believe me
what do you think was the single most
successful single most influential
example of civil disobedience during
your lifetime it's a lot easier to
sympathize with civil disobedience in
the context above modern Western
democratic country it's not easy to
sympathize when it ends in failure when
the leaders of the movement or a tragic
heroic snuffed out but is it really a
positive thing to live in a society
where 65% of people can vote for a law
and then a small minority maybe 5%
opposing that law through civil
disobedience can completely subvert the
course of democracy would it be a good
thing if just 5% of the population in
your country were fundamentalist
religious Catholics who opposed birth
control just 5% of people believe in
that really passionate and let's say 65
percent of people voted in a referendum
to say you know what
birth control should be legal it should
be widely available let's even say it
should be freely available let's say
it's available for free and that's in
this country you're living it okay so
there was a vote on this there was a
referendum to make birth control free
and available to everyone but just 5% of
your population engaging in civil
disobedience brought that down you would
be but you know within your rights a
wait wait wait wait wait a minute all of
us participated in this democratic
process and we didn't just vote you know
there's some kind of procedure leading
up to the vote people made speeches
people wrote articles
you know we engaged in this process
maybe not as equals maybe it's not
perfectly transparent maybe it's not
perfectly fair but nevertheless with all
its imperfection we participate in this
process and sixty-five percent of us
decided that this was in our interest to
make birth control available to everyone
and the 65% we didn't just decide that
it was in our best interest we decided
that this was in the best interest of a
hundred percent we made this decision
for all of us we made this to benefit
you also because even though you
disagree with us we decided that we're
right and you're wrong so we're doing
this for you too
and now here you are you have just 5% of
the population but you're well organized
you're religious fanatics let's say
you've got a little bit of money you
know these this 5% of the population
they've got donations coming in and
through civil disobedience you're
shutting down the airport you make it
impossible for airplanes to take off and
now this minority of the population is
holding the whole society hostage
through civil disobedience it's
demanding that the majority concede to
the minority that they don't rule in
their own self-interest or the interest
of 1% but that in effect this 5% of the
population whatever maybe um I don't
think you would sympathize if we were
talking about anti-abortion pro-life
protesters you know again maybe 5% of
the population overturning the decision
of the majority about abortion I don't
think you would sympathize if we were
talking about anti-vaxxers may or may
not be 5 percent of the population
people who are morally opposed to the
use of vaccine quite possibly because
they're religious fanatics what are the
reasons if they hold all Society what
we're actually interested in here are
two things one is the difference between
right and wrong okay it's possible 51
percent of the population will be it's
entirely possible okay and that's why
point two is we're interested in who who
gets to be right who gets known who gets
to make that who gets to make that
mistake
who gets to learn from those mistakes in
a dictatorship it may be just one person
it's the first it gets to be right and
wrong but no I'm actually very
fundamentally opposed to the model of a
society being ruled and being led
through civil disobedience of tiny
minorities acting in their own
self-interest or in their perceived
self-interest what I'm interested in is
the whole of society or the majority of
society being engaged in discussions and
debates and then coming to a conclusion
and voting and then all of us having to
deal with the consequences of that vote
of that law being passed of that policy
being oppressed
let's come back to my question I asked
you earlier I'm gonna tell you the
single most decisive and important
example of civil disobedience during my
lifetime it was in the disputed election
of the year 2000 the election of George
W Bush against Al Gore some of you might
be old enough to remember this there was
a formal recounting process ordered if
that recounting process had gone ahead
as a matter of fact Al Gore would have
become the next president of the United
States of America the recount was
legally ordered and it began to be
carried out they had offices that a
small office building and then a few
security guards but they didn't have the
army there didn't have a whole police
force or anything hmm and an act of
civil disobedience halted interrupted
and prevented from continuing this
recount of the ballots now this act of
civil disobedience it looked like there
were only 30 people involved maybe there
were 200 people maybe there were 200
British I remember the the actual
videotape that appeared on the news it
looked like only a few dozen people were
there participating in this in this
protest in this act of civil
disobedience I remember a political
scientist who went
through the picture of the protesters
and identified a whole bunch of who they
were what their connections were to the
Republican Party and this this kind of
thing um so it was not a huge mob of
people now even if it was even if 5% of
the population which would be a huge
huge number people converge on this spot
and physically prevented the counting of
the ballots that would be the wrong
thing to do because it's not about 5% of
the population and it's not about 50
people or 200 people it's about everyone
it's about all of us it's about
democracy being as inclusive as possible
or at least including everyone who wants
to participate okay
so through this act of civil
disobedience a very small number of
people in peculiar circumstances
completely transformed the course of
world history that's not an exaggeration
the whole world would be different today
if during that period of eight years
even just that period of four years Al
Gore had been impressed in the United
States instead of george w bush that
period of time didn't just have dramatic
impacts the united states america had
unbelievable impacts on the history of
the whole world and yes the the civil
disobedience of these few people the
consequences were magnified by unique
historical circumstances the
consequences were very much magnified by
a ridiculous decision made by the US
Supreme Court a decision I did actually
read but you know what all of political
history transpires in unique
circumstances
all right decisions and events their
consequences are magnified by peculiar
or historical circumstances beyond our
control all the time that's that's not
what I believe in I don't believe in a
tiny minority of people a few hundred a
few thousand or even five percent of the
population perverting the course of
democracy and I know the excuses people
are gonna jump up to me oh well they
claim you know democracy is already
perverted yeah fix it you think Congress
is broken fix it I mean don't make that
an excuse in my opinion for something
that is fundamentally on
kradic and frankly anti-democratic as
the cure for what's wrong with your
particular form of democracy in your
particular country why is it that the
romanticization of civil disobedience
enters into our political discourse so
late in the history of Western
civilization hmm why is it that I mean
if you just think about the nouns and
verbs we use in politics almost the
entire lexicon can be found in Aristotle
right democracy aristocracy oligarchy
the whole vocabulary and you know really
even the majority of what you find in
Karl Marx the idea of class interest and
self-interest how democracy works and
doesn't work we kind of get all the
machinery of political science handed to
us by this one author Aristotle in
ancient Greece and that's because he's
gathering together the work of many
different people from several
generations who observed frankly the
rise and fall of democracy they observed
both the advantages and disadvantages of
democracy in Athens
throughout ancient ancient Greek world
why is it that when we read Aristotle we
don't find this concept of civil
disobedience I'll tell you why it's
because it's obviously dishonorable and
evil in a society that truly has direct
democracy for someone to try to subvert
that democracy through civil
disobedience let's take the example of
Athens starting its war with Sparta so
this is the war that's documented by
Thucydides in his you know masterpiece
of Greek political history this is a
huge momentous decision and what all
sources record is that they had this
democratic process where people came
together the direct democracy they made
speeches they talked about it they
thought about it everyone got to stand
up and try to convince the crowd tried
to convince the citizens of Athens
whether it were
good idea or a bad idea for Athens to
start this war with with Sparta
no they did start the war and the war
was kind of a disaster
long story short but imagine if you were
one of the participants in that debate
were you really lived in a direct
democracy where you personally had the
chance to stand up in Parliament in
Greece it wasn't a parliament but it was
a the Penix it was the place where these
discussions took place that you yourself
had the opportunity to stand up in
Parliament and make your case make your
speech for why everyone else assembled
there should agree with you and vote the
same way you did as soon as that process
is over imagine how dishonorable and
really evil it would be for you to say
well I didn't win in this debate
I didn't convince enough of you to vote
the same way I wanted to vote so now I'm
gonna engage in civil disobedience now
I'm gonna be a sore loser I'm gonna
subvert the whole process of democracy
I'm gonna even bring this society to a
standstill
I'm gonna shut down the harbor shut down
the airport I'm gonna sabotage the
military sabotage time engaging these
forms of civil disobedience that today
are celebrated as if they're heroic
within Western democracies because I
didn't it self-evidently absurd and it's
self-evidently evil in the context of
the discussions we have preserved from
ancient Athens for someone to even
propose this kind of civil disobedience
so the genealogy of civil disobedience
the emergence of this ideal as being
something frankly better than democracy
in many people's minds it only becomes
thinkable it only becomes possible to
imagine this as a moral cause when
direct democracy has degraded into a
form of indirect democracy a form of
democracy that is so indirect that your
country is starting Wars and you feel
hey I never had a chance to speak in
I never had a chance to have my voice or
I never got to vote on this there never
was a referendum
I was never consulted I never voted
you're going to war with my money my tax
dollars if possibly my son and my
grandson these people are going after
war you're gonna kill people with my
flag and my name I and my descendants
are gonna pay the consequence of the
decision and I wasn't a part of this
decision at all I didn't get to speak I
wasn't heard there maybe there was no
vote at all where the name of democracy
still exists but to some extent in
reality you live in an oligarchy you
live in an aristocracy you live in some
kind of mixed form of dictatorship and
then you are reduced to opposing that
dictatorship through civil disobedience
so in this way starting with Henry David
Thoreau then with Mohandas Gandhi in
India also there was a Russian school of
civil disobedience prior to communism
when the benifits our Tolstoy the
theoretician of non-violence and civil
disobedience okay now we have a Meisel
Valor now we have a view of civil
disobedience that lionize it that
presents it as something heroic but even
then it's only heroic when it fails it's
only heroic when it ends in tragedy it's
never heroic when it succeeds because
when it succeeds you're still
fundamentally talking about a situation
in which five percent of the population
quite likely to be religious fanatics
force their opinion on the other 95% of
the population if you want to see really
influential examples of civil
disobedience take a look at Israel do
you think Israel should be ruled by the
sober judgment of a hundred percent of
the population participating in a
democracy where they have to stand up
and make rational arguments whether they
believe in and consider the law on the
Constitution and people get to vote and
all this stuff
do you think it should be a procedural
rational democracy involving everyone or
do you think that a small minority of
religious fanatics should just be able
to go and engage in civil disobedience
if you've heard of the settlers in
Israel that's one of the most successful
examples of civil disobedience in the
world let me tell you something
settler is a very strange euphemism for
what they've done in the last four years
something like that yes a highly
motivated especially religiously defined
fanatical minority can push around the
whole of society can lead that society
into Wars and can prevent that society
from fighting a war Israel must be one
of the most disturbing examples in the
world but people want to use this term
selectively so that you're only talking
about civil disobedience when you're
talking about people in India resisting
the British Empire and they don't want
to talk about civil disputes don't want
to use this term when you're talking
about Zionist Jewish fundamentalists
extremely religious people in Israel
going out and basically stealing land in
the West Bank it's illegal what they're
doing even under the law of Israel let
alone under the law of the West Bank
Palestinian transitional authority and
this kind of stuff that is civil
disobedience civil disobedience is rule
of your society by the most militant
minority in Israel who do you think that
is in Afghanistan who do you think that
is I'm not going to claim to you that 55
percent of the population are always
right and that the minority is always
wrong I would I would never make that
claim that's preposterous sometimes the
majority in society is going to be wrong
but the process of making that decision
whereby the evidence is presented the
it's our Wade speeches are made there
were rational arguments and
counter-arguments and then we vote okay
so are we gonna have are we gonna have
vaccines for everyone you know there's a
scientific case there's a moral case
there probably are economic
considerations okay we've made this
decision 65 percent of us have decided
that a hundred percent of us should be
vaccinated the moral opposition of just
five percent can bring the whole of
society to its knees if you believe in
civil disobedience and I don't